## Requirements

A normal, big, or huge version of vim 8.2 or later is probably
necessary to use the plugin. I've gotten the plugin working on a
normal version of vim 8.2.0000. The listener feature which the plugin
relies on is introduced in a late patch to vim 8.1 so the requirement
can be only scarcely reduced.

`unitex` needs to be installed and configured. You may pay a visit to
<https://github.com/juiyung/unitex> for doing that. For a quick guide
see the [Quick Start](#quick) section.

Vim's `'encoding'` needs to be "utf-8", as well as the encoding of
files you work with using this plugin.

## Installation

If you use a plugin manager, just use it and there are no special
notes. Otherwise you may try out
[vim-plug](https://github.com/junegunn/vim-plug) or alike, follow the
manager's guidance to install the plugin.

Alternatively you could use vim's own package managing system
available since vim 8. Suppose your vim files are in the `~/.vim`
directory (this depends on your `'runtimepath'`, see `:help rtp` in
vim) you can install this plugin through:

    mkdir -p ~/.vim/pack/foo/start
    cd ~/.vim/pack/foo/start
    git clone https://github.com/juiyung/vim-unitex.git

The name "foo" is arbitrary.

## <a id="quick">Quick Start</a>

For setting up `unitex`, the following commands are probably
sufficient on Unix-like systems:

    git clone https://github.com/juiyung/unitex.git
    cd unitex
    sudo make install
    mkdir -p ${XDG_CONFIG_HOME:-~/.config}/unitex
    cp rules.tsv ${XDG_CONFIG_HOME:-~/.config}/unitex/

With requirements met and the plugin installed, start editing a
(La)TeX document and execute in the command-line

    :Unitex on

This turns on the unusual "syntax concealment" provided by the plugin.
You may save the document then `less` it in a terminal, you would see
that no actual Unicode replacement is there, which means the document
can be compiled like usual.

You could add to your vimrc

    au FileType tex Unitex on

or add

    Unitex on

to your `ftplugin/tex.vim` file so that---assuming you have `filetype
plugin on` somewhere---the unitex concealment would be automatically
turned on for (La)TeX documents. You could also have the following
mappings, in `ftplugin/tex.vim` or in FileType autocommands in vimrc:

    imap <buffer> <C-g>p <Plug>(unitex-peek)
    nmap <buffer> <Leader>p <Plug>(unitex-peek)

So that you can use `<C-g>p` in insert-mode and `<Leader>p` in normal
mode to unconceal the line of the cursor (`<Leader>` is backslash by
default, `:help <Leader>` tells you more), which may be occasionally
useful. The keys `<C-g>p` and `<Leader>p` are examples here, you are
supposed to pick your preferred keys to map to `<Plug>(unitex-peek)`.

## Description

The `:Unitex on` command turns "unitex concealment" on, it starts
running `unitex` as a job on the background (one is reused if
previously started by the plugin and still running) with a channel to
communicate with it, filters the buffer content through the channel,
and sets up a listener (a subroutine responding to buffer changes) for
the buffer. Subsequent changes you make to the buffer is recorded, and
each time nothing is pending (SafeState), lines having been changed
since last SafeState that are not under the cursor are passed to
`unitex` through the channel, and the results are substituted into the
buffer.

All these attempts to achieve this: As you view and edit the document
it feels like vim's syntax concealment is turned on, but unlike in
syntax concealment those Unicode symbols are real characters, you can
not only see them but also edit text containning them. More
differences between the effect created by this plugin and vim's syntax
concealment are discussed in [a later section](#pros).

A mapping `<Plug>(unitex-peek)` is provided to restore the line under
the cursor when unitex concealment is turned on. The background job
started is still used, as `unitex` has been programmed to restore
lines prepended with a special code (ETX). Effort is made to
approporiately position the cursor in the restored line. This
restoration is always counted as a change to the buffer, so the line
gets concealed again when you leave it. (Be aware that this also means
using the mapping after undoing some changes creates a new undo
branch. In case it's unintended, the `:earlier` command can help.)

Undoing amounts to a change to the buffer and the listener gets
notified, however, such changes are not recorded, and in SafeState if
it's detected that there are still redoable changes the substitution
wouldn't be made, so that redoing wouldn't be accidentally messed up.
When the substitution does take place it's joined with the previous
undo block, there is thus no need to detect changes caused by undoing,
as unconverted text wouldn't be revealed by undoing (unless you keep
undoing till past the point when unitex concealment has been turned
on).

The plugin handles the writing of buffer to disk file, so as to make
the disk file always contain the unconcealed content (`'buftype'` is
set to "acwrite" to achieve this, so beware if the option is set
otherwise as possibly done by other plugins, the described behavior
would be broken). Currently writing and appending a range of lines to a
file are however not handled specially.

## Tips

1. Be aware that the `unitex` program and its configuration affect the
   behavior of this plugin---this might be an easily forgotten fact as
   the use of `unitex` is hidden by the plugin's interface---so if the
   plugin doesn't work it might be due to `unitex` not being properly
   installed or configured, another implication is that you can enhance
   the plugin by supplying `unitex` with better tuned rules.

2. There are certainly some disadvantages of the plugin if it's used
   alone, but note that the plugin and vim's conceal feature employ
   two completely different mechanisms that don't exclude each other.
   So for example although it's unsuitable to use the plugin for
   hiding delimiters---hiding is possible by substitutions with blank
   characters but that would generally bring troubles for
   editing---you could use syntax concealment for that.

3. With this plugin you might want to insert Unicode symbols directly
   into the document, for example instead of inserting `\varepsilon`
   you could type `Ctrl-k` + `e` + `*` in insert-mode to get `Îµ` (need
   digraph support). Insert-mode mappings, abbreviations, keymaps,
   digraphs, input methods, other plugins, there are many
   possiblilities and you might begin to find doing so more
   convenient. The role of this plugin then is to make it needless for
   you to insert all symbols as Unicode characters in order to obtain
   a consistent looking of documents, and to ease compilation of
   documents with unicode symbols by making a restored version be
   written (this requires Unicode characters directly inserted be
   covered by `unitex`'s rules).

## Unicode Rendering Issues

If you got "tofu"s where Unicode characters are substituted into the
text, you would need to look for fonts supporting them. You don't
necessarily need to replace your favorite font if it doesn't cover
enough Unicode characters. In gvim there is a fallback mechanism for
fonts, the `'guifont'` option is a list of fonts where a character not
found in one would be looked up in the next. If you are using terminal
vim, the terminal emulator might provide the same mechanism as well,
`urxvt` does, for example.

In the rules file shipped with `unitex`, combining grapheme joiner
(CGJ) is currently used in many places. Many common fonts cover it,
however I found that some fonts though does contain CGJ somehow
doesn't make it invisible, if this turns out a problem in your case
the font would need to be replaced (unless you managed to avoid CGJ).

## <a id="pros">Advantages over Vim's Syntax Concealment</a>

Using vim's syntax concealment, visually you can set the
`'concealcursor'` option in order to achieve a effect close to what the
plugin provides, but that would cause a separation of the text you
edit and the text you see, more specifically, the left and right
motions of cursor and effects of deletion and insertion become
unintuitive, you would encounter situations where pressing `l` many
times in normal mode is needed just to move across one visual
character, and deletion of one visual character cannot not be done by
pressing Backspace once in insert-mode. With what's provided by this
plugin, there is not such separation, what you see is what you edit.

If `'concealcursor'` is not set, the difference is only more obvious.
Cursor moved to a concealed line would end up in a hardly predictable
position. You would have no concealment for the line you put the
cursor on, having which, I suppose, is generally wanted if without the
subsequent quirks of setting `'concealcursor'` that make it not really
a choice for many people. In a situation where the unconcealed text is
more convenient or you want to check the underlying text, the mapping
`<Plug>(unitex-peek)` can be used.

A minor point: Vim's syntax concealment highlights all concealment
characters with a single highlight group that might not always fit
into the context, whereas characters substituted into the document
naturally gets highlighted according to the context, so this plugin
may provide a better visual effect than syntax concealment does.

## Quickfix Issue

`:Unitex on` sets `'buftype'` to "acwrite", this might cause trouble
when the quickfix feature is also used. There is an issue in vim's
official repository closely related to this problem
(<https://github.com/vim/vim/issues/516>), which by the time this
plugin is written has remained open for quite a few years. I suppose
vim developers will eventually fix it but before that we need to
resort to a workaround. I found the plugin
[QFEnter](https://github.com/yssl/QFEnter) helpful.
